when you force employees back to the
office do you drive away your top talent
while some CEOs impose strict return to
office mandates in the name of
productivity industry research tells a
troubling story about the results today
we're joined by mitsmr columnist Brian
Elliot whose provocative analysis of
return to office policies became one of
our most popular articles this year
drawing from new data and real world
examples Brian reveals what why RTO
mandates often backfire and what
successful leaders are doing instead in
this conversation he shares
evidence-based strategies you can use to
boost productivity and retention at the
same
[Music]
time Brian you wrote an article for
mitsmr in March saying that RTO mandates
did not deliver the expect did
productivity boost or financial
performance gain does the latest
research data back that up it does it's
been a really interesting few months
because for a while there it seemed like
this topic was calming down a bit but
what's happened since is things have
gotten heated up again so back in March
when I wrote that article one of the
studies that I talked about was one from
Mark ma of the University of Pittsburgh
that said that firms that put mandates
in place showed no financial performance
benefit over the ensuing year it did
have a KnockOn effect on employee
engagement since that uh Nick bloom had
a study that came out in nature that
said that hybrid work is equally
productive uh in the in the measurement
they did with one company but had a very
positive effect on retention of
employees relative to being full-time in
the office there's a study that came out
of a combination of professors at
Cornell and University of Utah they did
a similar set of analyses around
financial performance and found that
there's not even a stock market benefit
some CEOs I think are expecting to get a
pop Wall Street rewarding them now for
getting tough on employees it turns out
that doesn't happen either and then
there's been studies that have come out
of both McKenzie and BCG showing that
firms that are more flexible actually
result in higher Revenue growth uh on
top of it it's a bit of the unitary CEO
uh saying that this is the way I want us
to work and not getting a reward for it
from a financial perspective top down
decision little reward top down decision
little reward to no reward to negative
consequences for their employees longer
term will see how this plays out
interesting data Amazon recently imposed
a strict return to office mandate for
its employees that will take effect in
January of
2025 Dell recently ordered its sales
staff in the Austin area back to the
office immediately yeah employees
immediately started voicing their
displeasure about these decisions online
yeah why is there such a continuing
disconnect between the the CEOs and the
employees on this issue yeah it's a
shame that there is such a disconnect
because we tend to polarize this into
either everybody wanting full-time in
the office or full-time remote when the
vast majority of people want regular
time together with their teams we can
come back to that about how you make
that happen but those disconnects are
pretty fundamental sometimes what you're
seeing is some CEOs who are making
decisions on the basis of what they
think is right for an entire company a
large scale organization that's actually
distributed across multiple locations
and functions around the globe that
person may be making that decision on
the basis of what was right for them as
they grew up and went through the system
what made them successful and often
forget that they may not look like what
the rest of their employee based looks
like in terms of for example caregiving
responsibilities but there are ways to
do this that other firms have figured
out how to do which is don't put that
Nexus of decision-making at the
executive level to make a unitary one-
siiz fits-all uh decision but also don't
leave it to individual chaos business
units functions and teams are the right
place to put that decision if you get a
team working together and talking about
why we should come together what types
of activities and events are best done
in person you get a higher level of
satisfaction a higher level of
Engagement according to research done by
BCG and you get people that feel like
they are involved in the conversation
which means they feel like they are
trusted to be part of finding the
solution you also wrote that RTO
mandates are a shire way for companies
to lose their star performers yeah why
are the high performers likely to leave
after these forced returns to office
yeah so higher performers and this came
out of work that was being done by a
couple of different researchers as well
as research out of Gartner people that
have been frequently promoted in their
organization are more likely to leave
people who are more tenured in an
organization according to another
academic study are more likely to leave
under the under a mandate part of the
reason for that is they're marketable
sure these the most talented people
inside of an organization right and
they're the ones that have the ability
to find a job more easily because they
are your top performers but there's
another reason behind this sometimes
this is being done because senior
Executives say look I'm worried that
there's a part of my population that's
not working hard enough I had one
executive say to me I don't know that
they're walking the dog four hours a day
uh but I do know that if they're in the
office they can't be walking the dog
four hours a day what you're saying to
those top performers is I don't trust
you there's a there's a causal
relationship between
commands and policies and the reactions
that people who are actually top
performers have upwork released a study
this summer where 63% of the executives
they pulled who put mandates in place
say that their firms disproportionately
lost women and in most cases that had a
knock on effect on productivity of the
firm because they couldn't replace those
people fast enough if we fast forward to
January
2026 Amazon has done this uh forced
return to office
yeah what will they have gained and
lost so they'll have lost a lot of their
top talents will it be enough to impact
Amazon time will tell um it's a very
large company and it can do quite well
um even when they went to a three-day
week mandate and they asked teams to
collocate with their organizations I
know of firms that started
cherry-picking off people from Amazon
right because folks were looking for a
place that felt like they weren't going
to break their promises that were made
to employees and looking for a new place
to land so there's going to be some
attrition that happens over the course
of this but you're also going to see
something that's a little bit more
Insidious which is people trudging back
into the office just to punch the clock
um literally there are Amazon employees
who have said this on online forums
right which is I'm I'm just going to
punch the clock until I find another
role at another company and maybe that
takes them a year maybe their
performance Flags enough that Amazon
gets rid of them but that lag of
performance is nothing that anyone
should welcome uh and find you know
attractive in an organization the other
thing that's going to happen is
non-compliance right if you look at some
of the other research out there
even when a policy is put in place you
still end up with a sub 50% compliance
perspective we all get the reason why a
mandate and a policy from the top
results in a conversation that every
manager dreads which is when those
things come out there's two weeks of
extremely low productivity while you
sort out with your boss how does this
apply to me will you actually crack down
on people is a key question you may
crack down on some people in some parts
of the organization that you're trying
to shrink but you're going to let it go
with people that your top performance in
key roles that you know uh you need to
show more flexibility to because you
can't afford to lose them at this point
you're not an executive making this
decision without realizing that some
people are going to leave on a voluntary
basis and this is in fact in some ways a
soft layoff about a third of HR
Executives who were pulled earlier this
year said that mandates are a form of
soft layoff culture change is some of
the hardest work that leaders have to do
what first steps do you suggest for
leader who wants to help their
organization move from a culture of
measuring productivity via FaceTime to
measuring productivity via outcomes yeah
the first thing is you need to know what
outcomes you're trying to measure right
so I've actually seen this in
organizations it's really hard there's
an executive wrestling match that needs
to happen which is what goals are most
important to us what are our priorities
how are we going to articulate these in
measurable ways if you put people in a
position where what you're saying to
them or signaling to them is what
matters to me is whether or not you're
showing up your activity how many hours
a day are you in the office how many
hours a day is your green light on
showing that you're active online then
people will perform to that metric right
that means you're not getting them
focused on the outcomes and the reason
they're doing that is you're not giving
them the trust to actually you know
deliver against the problems that
they're facing that's a doom Loop right
I'm monitoring your activity therefore
uh you don't trust me therefore I'm not
going to focus on the the root cause at
hand I'm just going to sort of punch the
the clock therefore performance degrades
and it keeps going around and around if
instead you can have that conversation
about what are the goals and outcomes
how do we actually measure people at the
team level against that and in some
cases to the individual level against
that how do we hold people accountable
to Performance not to activity what
you're saying is I trust you to hit the
outcome I'm going to give you more
degrees of freedom and latitude to get
there but I expect you to actually
perform right that's really important in
terms of list lifting their levels of
Engagement you're boosting trust they
actually perform better that aligns with
the organization's goals overall and
it's a positive boom Loop instead of a
negative Doom Loop and many of us feel
that during the pandemic we proved it
could work yes measuring to outcomes
yeah and a lot of organizations have
actually made the investment so I've
actually worked with and talked with a
number of organizations that have said
hey this has shown a light on the fact
that we weren't doing this we were
reliant on management by walking around
which is honest the weakest form of
management for performance right I need
to actually measure people on the basis
of performance it takes work and effort
to put these systems in place so Brian
if I'm a leader what is the one key
takeaway you want me to walk away with
from your research on RTO mandates the
number one question that I ask leaders
when they're contemplating an RTO
mandate or getting more stringent about
an RTO mandate is what problem are you
trying to solve and let's get specific
about what the problem is and if the
problem is is innovation or the problem
is productivity can we Define what we
mean by Innovation or productivity can
we find ways to engage people in what
the solution to that might be because an
RTO mandate simply takes off the table
one degree of freedom and how you solve
it right right you got to figure out
from a systemic perspective what's
getting in your way if it's a lack of
innovation are you listening closely
enough to the field right are you
understanding what your customers are
saying are you understanding what your
competitors are doing are you allowing
the voices of descent in your own
organization to bring forward heretical
ideas trust and psychological safety are
a bigger deal when it comes to
Innovation than whether or not people
are collocated if it's productivity
where's the lack of productivity how do
we Define it what might be getting in
people's way if our sales teams are
slowing down do they have too big a bag
of tricks have we done insufficient
training have we not gotten the junior
staff skilled up and capable those are
more productive conversations because
not only are you thinking about the
answers yourself but you have to involve
your people in the conversation command
and control is not going to work very
well especially as we enter a world
powered by Ai and other capabilities you
can't keep up you can't command and
control your way out of the future Brian
thanks so much Lori thank you it's been
great chatting with you we hope you
found Brian's insights valuable for a
deeper dive check out his full article
return to office mandates how to lose
your best performers on MIT slone
management review's website the link is
in the description below and if you're
interested in learning more from our
authors explore our curated playlist of
interviews thanks for watching
[Music]